# Rainfall-prediction-for-the-state-of-Gujarat-using-deep-learning-technique
Prediction  of  rainfall  which  varies  both  spatially and  temporally  is  extremely  challenging.  Infrared  and  visible spectral   data   from   satellites   have   been   extensively   used   for rainfall prediction. In this study, two deep learning methods MLP and  LSTM  are  discussed  at  length  for  predicting  precipitation at a fine spatial (10km × 10km) and temporal (hourly) resolution for  the  state  of  Gujarat.  These  methods  are  applied  by  using the  multispectral  (VIS,  SWIR,  MIR,  WV,  TIR1,  TIR2)  channel data  such  as  cloud  top  temperature  and  radiance  values  of  the INSAT-3D  satellite  (ISRO)  as  features  for  the  model.  Textural features   of   satellite   images   are   incorporated   by   considering mean  and  standard  deviation  of  each  pixel’s  neighbourhood. Rainfall  also  heavily  depends  on  the  elevation  and  vegetation of  earth’s  surface  so  we  have  used  SRTM  DEM  and  AWIFS NDVI respectively. Measurements of actual rainfall are obtained from  AWS  (point  source  stations)  and  TRMM  (10km × 10km resolution).  First  dataset  contains  only  TIR1  band  temperature and   AWS   rainfall   data   for   training   but   the   second   dataset includes  multispectral  channel  data  and  TRMM  rainfall  data which brought about great improvement in results. For each data- set, a comparison between MLP and LSTM models is discussed here.  We  were  able  to  classify  the  rainfall  into  nil  (0mm),  low ( &lt; 2mm),  medium  ( > = 2mm  and &lt; 5mm)  and  high  ( > = 5  mm) with a high accuracy. Metrics like accuracy, precision, recall and fscore have been computed to get better insights about the dataset and  its  corresponding  outcome.  Our  results  show  that  LSTM performs  significantly  better  than  MLP  for  any  given  balanced class  data-sets.
